MUS240
Atonal Melody, Sketch #3
Due Wednesday, Class VI

Working with Intervallic Consistency

Compose a short piece (16-30 measures long) for one melodic instrument using two
intervals only and their inversions (ex. M2/m7 and m3/M6). Do not choose two
intervals which will limit pitches you can move to, such as two whole-tone
intervals (ex. M2/m7 and m6/M3). Simply put, choose one set of intervals from
the non-whole-tone category and one set from the whole-tone category or choose
two sets from the non-whole-tone category.

Non-whole-tone intervals:    Whole-tone intervals:
m2/M7				M2/m7
m3/M6				M3/m6
P4/P5				TT/(TT)

The object of this assignment is to experiment with composing music focusing on
intervallic consistency to establish your musical language. By sticking to only
two interval choices, you can create a new harmonic context that relies on
consistency in lieu of a tonal center. As the melody moves from one note to the
next, you should find that it is quite simple to move freely among all twelve
pitches.

Continue to focus on melodic shaping tactics of flow, melodic direction,
balance, rhythmic interest, repetition, point of arrival, etc. Include dynamics,
phrase markings and articulations to create coherent musical statements-focusing
on a single melodic line to create a compelling musical shape. Create a short
ABA form incorporating a strongly contrasting B idea. With the return of A,
employ some musical variance with the opening. A programmatic inspiration could
be helpful to lend coherence as you grapple with a potentially unfamiliar
musical language. Write your melody with a particular woodwind instrument in
mind- using what you know about their ranges, general strengths and character.

Submit your work to your work folders as pdf and mp3 files; also, bring a print
out of your work to class, if possible.

Name your files with your first and last name followed by an underscore and the
assignment name-i.e. BenSmith_AtonalMelody_Sketch3.pdf
